---
title:  "App Idea - Track fitness by scanning LF machine QR codes"
date:   2016-09-18 14:11:00
category: post
tags: [app, brainstorm, react]
---

Since I've gotten back from vacation (more on that later), I've been getting back in to a workout mindset. While doing a set of [hip adduction][hips]{:target="_blank"}, I noticed a QR code stuck to the side of the machine... from there sparked an idea for a fitness tracker, while also getting some practice building a React application from the ground up.

### Inception

I scanned the QR code on the adduction machine, and it redirected me to a Youtube video from LifeFitness (the manufacturer of the machine) on how to properly perform the exercise. This seemed relatively useless... the instructions are written on the machine already, with pictures for proper posture and movement.

It did give me an idea, though... there were LifeFitness QR codes on literally every machine at the gym. What if instead of redirecting you to a youtube video, I could leverage the information contained in the QR code to populate some form in a fitness tracker with information about the particular machine you were about to use!

It could even contain a link or embedded version of the Youtube video, cuz why not?

### Further thoughts

I haven't tried any fitness trackers yet, and don't really know what options are out there. Regardless, I think this will be a good opportunity for me to use some of the technologies I've been learning about recently in a non-work context.

### Technical challenges

Since this would be a native phone application (using the phone's camera for QR scanner), I'd want to build using React Native. I've never built a native app before, so this will pose its own set of techincal challenges (but it is a good excuse to learn).

I'm not exactly sure how QR codes work. I understand they're like a bar code, containing information specified by the generator of the code that a QR reader can interpret. The particular QR codes on the LifeFitness machines at the gym presumably contain a Youtube link, and maybe an action to tell the phone to open up the default web browser to view the link. Or maybe it just contains the link, and simulates a "click", which would automatically open the browser with that link?

I'm working under the assumption that I'd be able to build an application that can interpret QR codes not generated by the app itself, and prevent the default action from occurring. If I could do this, I could create a map between the Youtube URLs (the unique parts) which are static, and the type of machine they map to. I could use this data to bring the user directly to a form for the type of machine they are about to use when they scan the QR codes.

### After the Scan

After the initial scan, the user would be brought to a page (form? workflow?) that would be auto populated with the current date, and provide some historical context for the user around what their weight settings / sets were like the last time they used the machine. This gives valuable context to the user so they can choose settings scoped to their workout goals (bulk, tone, stamina, etc).

It could also tell the user how many days it has been since they performed the exercise, to ensure the user does not over exercise particular muscle groups.

### Other features

Users could open the app and see data views around what machines / muscle groups they worked out the last time at the gym. This would hopefully be a way to encourage users to not spend multiple days in a row focusing on the same muscle groups, and could also highlight to the user muscle groups that are being neglected / overworked.

Historical data would also be neat to show: users could see graphs of how they've been progressing on each machine, and the app could even offer recommendations on how to go about ramping up / challenging yourself after too much time in one weight zone.

Long term: Fitbit integration? Integration with scales that track your weight? Would be neat to have this data.

### How to begin

__R&D__: I'm going to create a [new React application][react]{:target="_blank"} so I can start tracking the project [using Github's new project management tools][gh]{:target="_blank"}. Then, some research tasks: looking up information about how QR codes work / are generated, as well as finding some libraries that scan and interpret QR codes. I'll write a TIL with my findings, maybe with a link to a quick demo to show how data can be encoded / interpreted via QR code.

__Phase 1__: I'd want to prototype a React Native application that is literally just a QR scanner that decodes the data from the code, prevents any default actions from occurring, and displays the data on the phone. Acceptance criteria would be to take my scanner to the gym, scan a QR code there, and have the Youtube link display on the phone without navigating through the link.

__Phase 2__: Next, I'd want to be able to store this data somewhere (remote database). This might be a good point to begin creating the application API, maybe using something BaaS provider like parse, which I've also never used before. Acceptance criteria would be a table in a database that contains a mapping between Fitness Machine Name and the corresponding Youtube link for that machine. Ideally this would be populated directly through scanning unique QR codes at the gym, POSTing to the server with each one.

__Phase 3__: Now that we have both a functioning QR scanner and the data mapping between Youtube video and machine name, begin building the workflow for submitting actual data (reps, sets, weight) once you've scanned a machine. This will finally involve some account management / authentication / authorization for the app.

__Phase 4__: Detail views for your personal history with each machine. When did you last perform the exercise? How many reps / sets / weight?

Awesome. Let's get to work!

[hips]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7x5fIItZbY
[react]: https://facebook.github.io/react/blog/2016/07/22/create-apps-with-no-configuration.html
[gh]: https://github.com/universe-2016

