---
title:  "em vs rem"
date:   2017-03-20 20:46:00
category: til
tags: [css]
---

TIL the difference between `em` and `rem` in CSS.

I found the [em-vs-rem blog post on zellwk.com][blog]{:target="_blank"} to be helpful in cementing my understanding. Read there for more detail. 

### The Difference

`em`: equivalent to the font-size of the nearest parent. If an element has font-size of 12px, `1em` for that element and any direct children of that element is 12px.

`rem`: equivalent to the font-size of the root element. If the root element has a font-size of 14px `1rem` for all elements on the page is 14px.

The default font-size in a browser is 16px. Therefore if no font-size is explicitly set for any elements in your layout, `1em` and `1rem` will both be equal to 16px.

`em` and `rem` can be used to scale padding, margin, and other pixel based CSS properties. Using `em` and `rem` to perform text spacing **will make your UI respond to changes in font-size.** This can be advantageous, since changing the font-size won't require additional work to resize padding, margins, and other layout properties: they will just auto-scale based on the font-size of the page!

### Application on the Site

Understanding `em` was useful when styling the TIL counter at the top of my TIL page. At small screen widths, the font-size of my h3's scale down from 20px to 16px. I had explicitly defined a 20px font-size for my TIL counter, which is a child of the h3. Since I used an explicit pixel number, the font size of my counter did not scale with the rest of the text, and as a result it looked large and out of place on small screen sizes.

I changed the font-size of my counter to be `1em`: in other words, equivalent to the font-size of the direct parent (which in this case is the h3 which has font-size of 20px at large screen widths and 16px at small screen widths).

This example really hammered home the importance of using relative measurements like `em` and `rem` when laying out your text.

[blog]: https://zellwk.com/blog/rem-vs-em/