---
title:  "Webpack: Paths and Naming"
date:   2017-04-22 13:42:00
category: til
tags: [webpack, javascript]
---

TIL the difference between `path` and `publicPath` in webpack, and how the `output.filename` property can be used to assign files to sub-directories in the path.

We have been using webpack's filesystem watcher at work to re-bundle our files on-save during development. I've been doing some prototyping work of our UI against a new API, and I wanted to use `webpack-dev-server` (hereby referred to as `WDS`) to proxy requests to this new API while avoiding cross origin request errors in the browser. Using this feature of WDS would require some retooling and rethinking of how our development process works.

I found setting up `WDS` to be an enormous pain: the amount of configuration necessary to set up webpack in general is intimidating, and the documentation is notoriously poor. I'll be referencing the webpack config below for the rest of this blog post. **NOTE: we are using [webpack 2][wp2]{:target="_blank"} so the config might look slightly different if you're used to webpack 1 config.**

{% highlight javascript %}
  // filename: webpack.conf.js
  const path = require('path')
  const buildPath = '/build/'

  module.exports = {
    entry: {
      bundle: ['./static-assets/index.js'],
      vendor: ['react']
    },
    output: {
      filename: 'js/[name].min.js',
      path: path.join(__dirname, buildPath),
      publicPath: '/assets/'
    },
    devServer: {
      contentBase: path.join(__dirname, buildPath),
      proxy: {
        '/api2': 'http://localhost:3002'
      }
    },
    module: {
      rules: [
        {
          test: /\.less$/,
          use: 'css-loader!less-loader',
          exclude: /node_modules/
        }
      ]
    },
    plugins: [
      new CommonChunksPlugin({
        name: 'vendor',
        filename: 'js/[name].min.js',
        minChunks: Infinity
      })
    ]
  }
{% endhighlight %}

### `path` vs. `publicPath`

The bulk of my misunderstanding came from the differences between [`path`][path]{:target="_blank"} and [`publicPath`][publicPath]{:target="_blank"} in webpack.

`path` represents the **absolute path** for webpack file output in the file system. In other words: `path` is the physical location on disk where webpack will write the bundled files.

`publicPath` represents **the path from which bundled files should be accessed by the browser.** In other words: `publicPath` is an alias for files located at `path`, and if specified, files are accessible from the `publicPath` in the browser. 

In the example config above, `path` is set to `path.join(__dirname, '/build/')` in the output key. This means the files will be saved to disk at the absolute path `/Users/username/prototype/build/`. 

The `publicPath` is configured to `/assets/`. This makes my bundled files accessible from `http://localhost:3000/assets/`. 

I chose the public path `/assets/` because that is where we are expecting files to exist in our `index.html` page.  Using `publicPath`, I can match the static resource pathnames already being requested in my `index.html`, and **I don't need to worry about adding any conditionals to load assets at different paths based on environment** (i.e. dev vs prod). 

### Naming of bundled assets

I specified the name of the bundled files to be `'js/[name].min.js'` in the `output.filename` key. The code is not minified in development, but we minify for production and use the `.min.js` convention to name our minified files. By naming our bundled output with the `.min.js` postfix for development, we again don't need to perform any environment checks in our index.html file (to point to the right file names), which is great.

By prepending js/ to the filename in `output.filename`, webpack will write bundled files to a js sub-directory in the `output.path`. **This allows you to organize files of a particular type in appropriately named sub-directories.** 

Webpack also honors these sub-directories at the `publicPath`: for example, the bundle named `js/bundle.min.js` above would also be available at `localhost:3000/assets/js/bundle.min.js`.

`[name]` is a webpack convention that substitutes the bundle's name in the `output.filename` when it creates a bundle. In this case, the file's name is actually 'bundle' (which is configured in the entry key) so the resulting name would be `'js/bundle.min.js'`. Webpack also honors two other substitutions during naming: `[hash]` and `[id]`

I learned a lot more about webpack while setting up the webpack dev server, including about CommonChunksPlugin for dealing with vendor bundles, ExtractTextPlugin for pulling CSS out of the main bundles and in to their own side bundles, as well as some webpack dev server lessons which I will discuss in future TILs.

[wp2]: https://webpack.js.org/
[publicPath]: https://webpack.js.org/configuration/output/#output-publicpath
[path]: https://webpack.js.org/configuration/output/#output-path
