---
title:  "What is npx?"
date:   2018-10-06 13:39:00
category: til
tags: [npx, npm]
---

You may have heard of npm, but what about npx?

## What is npx

[`npx`][npx]{:target="_blank"} is a executable that is bundled with npm@5.2.0 and above.

It makes running binaries from packages installed in your node projects much simpler!

To try npx out, just type `npx {binaryName}`. npx will start by checking your project's local `node_modules/.bin` folder for the specified `binaryName`, and if it doesn't find it there, it will move to your global installs.

If the binary isn't found on your machine anywhere, it will **install the latest version in a one off install**, use it, then throw the install away! This way you don't have to worry about polluting your global scopes with packages that you use once in a blue moon (like `create-react-app` for example).

Similar to one off scripts above, you can point npx to a remote javascript file via the url, and npx will download it and execute it for you.

For example:

`npx https://gist.github.com/bambielli/8d7cb891423def24e643ac5be174bd03`

should log `the secret is: npx rox` to your console

Always be careful when executing remote files that you do not own... be sure to read through them to make sure there isn't any malicious code in there.

## Use case for npx

This week at work I was using the [`sequelize-cli`][sequelize]{:target="_blank"} package to automate the execution of migrations and seed data for a hackathon project.

The binary was installed locally to my project under `node_modules/.bin/sequelize`, and the readme for sequelize-cli instructed to execute the binary by typing that full path before each command.

My first instinct was to turn this into an `npm` script, which I did:

{% highlight javascript %}
// package.json

{
  //...
  "scripts": {
    "db:migrate" 'node_modules/.bin/sequelize db:migrate'
  }
}

{% endhighlight %}

I could run this script by typing `npm run db:migrate`, which is already pretty easy.

npx made life even easier, though: when I wanted to seed my database, I just ran `npx sequelize db:seed` from my command line, without needing to create a new npm script for seeding. Easy as that! No more typing the full node_modules path to your project binaries, or bloating your package.json with npm scripts that are shortcuts for project binaries.


[sequelize]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/sequelize-cli
[npx]: https://www.npmjs.com/package/npx